Extract rose/cylc from Run rAM3 page (#1106)
ACCESS-Hive/access-hive.github.io: docs/models/run_a_model/rose_cylc.md

## About
The _Rose/Cylc_ workflow management tool consists of two components:

* The [_Cylc_](https://niwa.co.nz/environmental-information/cylc-suite-engine) (pronounced ‘silk’) task engine, developed by the New Zealand National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA). Cylc is a workflow manager that automatically executes tasks according to the model's configuration. It also monitors all tasks, reporting any errors that may occur.
* The [_Rose_](https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/research/approach/modelling-systems/rose) framework developed by the UK Met Office (UKMO) which configures tasks for the _Cylc_ engine. Rose is a toolkit that can be used to view, edit and run some of the [ACCESS models](/models/access_models).

> A set of tasks configured by _Rose_ to run with the _Cylc7_ engine is called a _suite_. Every _suite_ has a unique identifier called `suite-ID` in the form `u-LLNNN`, where `L` is a letter and N is a number (e.g., u-ab123).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A set of tasks configured by _Rose_ to run with the _Cylc7_ engine is called a _suite_. Every _suite_ has a unique identifier called `suite-ID` in the form `u-LLNNN`, where `L` is a letter and `N` is a number (e.g., u-ab123).
```

## About
The _Rose/Cylc_ workflow management tool consists of two components:

* The [_Cylc_](https://niwa.co.nz/environmental-information/cylc-suite-engine) (pronounced ‘silk’) task engine, developed by the New Zealand National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA). Cylc is a workflow manager that automatically executes tasks according to the model's main cycle script `suite.rc`. _Cylc_ controls how the job will be run and manages the time steps of each model component. It also monitors all tasks, reporting any errors that may occur.

> * The [_Rose_](https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/research/approach/modelling-systems/rose) framework developed by the UK Met Office (UKMO) which configures tasks for the _Cylc_ engine. Rose is a toolkit that can be used to view, edit, or run an ACCESS modelling suite.

Reviewer: In `Cylc8` there is a change in the naming from _suite_ to _workflow_. Therefore, to facilitate update in the future, we have been careful not to use "suite" unless strictly appropriate.
As a consequence, I would rephrase this to:
```suggestion
* The [_Rose_](https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/research/approach/modelling-systems/rose) framework developed by the UK Met Office (UKMO) which configures tasks for the _Cylc_ engine. Rose is a toolkit that can be used to view, edit and run ACCESS models.
```

> * The [_Rose_](https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/research/approach/modelling-systems/rose) framework developed by the UK Met Office (UKMO) which configures tasks for the _Cylc_ engine. Rose is a toolkit that can be used to view, edit, or run an ACCESS modelling suite.

Author: It's a good question. My philosophy in this PR was to not lose any information, so I copied over any info that was in the Run rAM3 page that I deleted from there. 

I know I personally was asking Chermelle a few times what Rose and Cylc actually are, so I thought it was nice to have a bit more information about what they are without requiring readers to click on external sites (plus, the descriptions here are more concise than on the external pages). But this is just my mild preference - happy to go with what others think is best.

A set of tasks configured by _Rose_ to run with the _Cylc7_ engine is called a _suite_.

## Prerequisites

- **NCI account**<br>

>     Before running an ACCESS model, you need to [Set Up your NCI Account](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account).<br> _Time estimate: ~5 minutes to sign up, ~a few hours for the account to be set up._

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Before running an ACCESS model, you need to [Set Up your NCI Account](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account).<br> _Time estimate: ~5 minutes to sign up, a few hours for the account to be set up._
```

- **MOSRS account**<br>
    The [Met Office Science Repository Service (MOSRS)](https://code.metoffice.gov.uk) is a server run by the UKMO to support collaborative development with other partners organisations. MOSRS contains the source code for some ACCESS model components and configurations, and a MOSRS account is a license requirement to run some ACCESS configurations.<br>
    To apply for a MOSRS account, please contact your [local institutional sponsor](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/DAE/Prerequisites).
    {: #mosrs-account}

    !!! warning

>     The waiting time to obtain a MOSRS account may be 2-3 weeks.

Reviewer: Is this wait still valid now that we can provide MOSRS accounts?

>     The waiting time to obtain a MOSRS account may be 2-3 weeks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    !!! warning
        The waiting time to obtain a MOSRS account may be 2-3 weeks.
```

Is there a reason this time estimate is formatted differently to the other bits?

- **Join NCI projects**<br>
    Join the following projects by requesting membership on their respective NCI project pages:

    - [hr22](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/hr22/join)

>     _Time estimate: up to ~2 days_

Author: ```suggestion

```

    Further instructions in [Assign the persistent session to Cylc](#assign-the-persistent-session-to-cylc) below.

- **Rose/Cylc setup**<br>
    To get the required _Rose/Cylc_ setup, run:
    ```
    module use /g/data/hr22/modulefiles
    module load cylc7
    ```

    Further instructions in [Rose and Cylc executables](##rose-and-cylc-executables) below.

- **MOSRS authentication**<br>
    Authenticate using your MOSRS credentials:
    ```
    mosrs-auth
    ```

    Further instructions in [MOSRS authentication](#mosrs-authentication) below.

## Connecting to Gadi

You can run _Rose/Cylc_ either from a [_Gadi_ login node](#connect-via-gadi-login-node), or via an [ARE VDI session](#launch-are-vdi-desktop). 

### Connect via Gadi login node

<div markdown id="x11-forwarding">
!!! warning "X11 Forwarding"
    When connecting via SSH from a terminal, it is recommended to enable [X11 forwarding](https://some-natalie.dev/blog/ssh-x11-forwarding/), for example by adding the -X option to the `ssh` command. This allows the _Rose_ and _Cylc_ GUIs to be launched on your local machine.

> </div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Connect via Gadi login node
Follow the steps to [login to _Gadi_](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account/#login-to-gadi), making sure to enable [X11 forwarding](https://some-natalie.dev/blog/ssh-x11-forwarding/), for example by adding the -X option to the `ssh` command. This allows the _Rose_ and _Cylc_ GUIs to be launched on your local machine.
```

> Once you've connected, skip directly to [Set up a persistent session](#set-up-a-persistent-session).

Author: I think it's clearer to have two sections since there are two options. When I first went through I felt like we were pushing the VDI option (maybe we are?), so I thought having two sections explicitly is more clear for readers.

> Once you've connected, skip directly to [Set up a persistent session](#set-up-a-persistent-session).

Reviewer 2: It's certainly the easier option for beginners? People who have some experience with Linux and the terminal are likely to breeze through this section anyway.

### Launch ARE VDI Desktop

If you are not familiar with ARE, check out the [Getting Started on ARE](/getting_started/are) section.

!!! tip
    The ARE VDI session does not run model tasks directly; it only runs _Rose/Cylc_. The model tasks are dispatched by _Cylc_ to the compute nodes. This means the ARE VDI session requires minimal CPU and memory resources.

Go to the [ARE VDI](https://are.nci.org.au/pun/sys/dashboard/batch_connect/sys/desktop_vnc/ncigadi/session_contexts/new) page and launch a session with the following entries:

- **Walltime (hours)** &rarr; `2`<br>

>     Amount of hours the ARE VDI session will remain active for. This is only setup time, and does not reflect how long the actual configuration will take to run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Amount of hours the ARE VDI session will remain active for. This is only setup time, and does not reflect how long the actual configuration will take to run. 
    
    !!! tip 
        Some model configurations might require a greater setup time. Therefore, the _Walltime_ might need to be increased to avoid having to start an additional ARE session once the first one terminates.
```

Author: I think my suggestion above does what you suggest here?

Reviewer: This tip should still be added.

    <terminal-line data="output">&emsp;ssh &lt;name&gt;.&lt;$USER&gt;.&lt;project&gt;.ps.gadi.nci.org.au</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

The label of a newly-created _persistent session_ has the following format: <br>
`<name>.<$USER>.<project>.ps.gadi.nci.org.au`.

!!! tip
    If `-p <project>` is omitted, your [default project](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account/#change-default-project-on-gadi) `$PROJECT` will be used.

!!! tip 

>     The project assigned to a _persistent session_ does not have to be the same as the project used to run the ACCESS model configuration. In addition, the same persistent session can be used to run multiple simulations simultaneously.<br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The project assigned to a _persistent session_ does not have to be the same one used to run the ACCESS model configuration. In addition, the same persistent session can be used to run multiple simulations simultaneously.<br>
```

    The newly created persistent session is assigned a unique identifier, referred to here as `<persistent-session-uuid>`.

> ### Assign the persistent session to Cylc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Assign the persistent session to Cylc (once only) {: #assign-the-persistent-session-to-cylc }
```
The `{: #assign-the-persistent-session-to-cylc }` is added so the anchor link stays the same.

### Start a new persistent session

> Start a new persistent session by running (from either a _Gadi_ login node or an ARE VDI terminal instance):

Reviewer: I would not add the information that it can be run from any _Gadi_ instance.
```suggestion
Start a new persistent session by running:
```

Here we wrote above "Use this terminal for all subsequent steps in this guide.", but if we want to make it clearer which commands are supposed to be run on Gadi and which on a local terminal, I suggest we do it by changing the terminal animations so that the commands run on _Gadi_ and locally have different terminal prefixes (the orange dollar sign `$` in the terminal animations).
For example, `gadi_terminal $` for _Gadi_  and `local_terminal $` for the local ones. We could also make them of different colours.
However, if this is a good approach I think it should be consistent to all terminal animations and changed in all pages. Therefore, I would create a separate issue about this.

Author: I think this is a very good idea! 

I actually didn't realize there were any commands from a local terminal in these docs...so I guess clarity would be very good here! 😅

    <terminal-line data="output">&emsp;ssh &lt;name&gt;.&lt;$USER&gt;.&lt;project&gt;.ps.gadi.nci.org.au</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

The label of a newly-created _persistent session_ has the following format: <br>
`<name>.<$USER>.<project>.ps.gadi.nci.org.au`.

!!! tip
    If `-p <project>` is omitted, your [default project](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account/#change-default-project-on-gadi) `$PROJECT` will be used.

!!! tip
    While the project assigned to a _persistent session_ does not have to be the same as the project used to run the ACCESS model configuration, it does need to have allocated _Service Units (SU)_.<br>

> The project assigned to a _persistent session_ does not have to be the same as the project used to run the ACCESS model configuration. The newly created persistent session is assigned a unique identifier, referred to here as `<persistent-session-uuid>`.

Reviewer: This should be general. This is valid for any persistent session.

- [Local-only copy](#rosie-checkout)
- [Local and remote copy (new remote configuration)](#rosie-copy)

> Both options use [Rosie](https://metomi.github.io/rose/doc/html/tutorial/rose/furthertopics/rosie) - an [SVN](https://subversion.apache.org) repository wrapper with a set of options specific for ACCESS modelling suites. It is automatically available within the [_Rose_ setup](#rose).

Author: I suggest alternate wording below to not imply that Rosie is specific for ACCESS models. 

```suggestion
Both options use [Rosie](https://metomi.github.io/rose/doc/html/tutorial/rose/furthertopics/rosie) - an [SVN](https://subversion.apache.org) repository wrapper with a set of options that can be used for ACCESS models. It is automatically available within the [_Rose/Cylc_ setup](#rose).
```

Ideally, someone else here could suggest more precise wording and add what Rosie does such that it can be used with ACCESS models. E.g. "...with a set of options that can be used to...[insert text here] for ACCESS models." Or something similar.

> Both options use [Rosie](https://metomi.github.io/rose/doc/html/tutorial/rose/furthertopics/rosie) - an [SVN](https://subversion.apache.org) repository wrapper with a set of options specific for ACCESS modelling suites. It is automatically available within the [_Rose_ setup](#rose).

Reviewer 2: Does anyone have a good description as to what _Rosie_ actually is? My understanding was that it was a tool for interacting with the MOSRS repository. Is it actually a wrapper, or is more like `gh` for Git repositories?

> Both options use [Rosie](https://metomi.github.io/rose/doc/html/tutorial/rose/furthertopics/rosie) - an [SVN](https://subversion.apache.org) repository wrapper with a set of options specific for ACCESS modelling suites. It is automatically available within the [_Rose_ setup](#rose).

Reviewer: From [Rose documentation](https://metomi.github.io/rose/doc/html/tutorial/rose/furthertopics/rosie.html#rosie):

> Rosie is a tool for managing Rose suite configurations which is included in Rose. The purpose of Rosie is to facilitate suite development, management and collaboration. Rosie:
>
> - Adds version control to Rose suite configurations.
> - Updates a database to keep track of Rose suite configurations.

If you're not sure which option to use, we recommend using the "local-only copy". The "remote and local copy" is best used if you plan to commit the suite back to the remote.

> Suites are, by default when copying from MOSRS, created in the user's _Gadi_ home directory under `~/roses/<suite-ID>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configurations copied from MOSRS are created by default in the user's _Gadi_ home directory under `~/roses/<suite-ID>`.
```

This path will be referred to as the *suite directory*.

> {: #suitedir }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This path will be referred to as the *configuration directory*.
{: #configdir }
```

> The suite directory contains multiple subdirectories and files, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration directory contains multiple subdirectories and files, including:
```

- `app` &rarr; directory containing the configuration files for various tasks within the suite.

> - `meta` &rarr; directory containing the GUI metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `meta` &rarr; directory containing the _Rose_ GUI metadata.
```

- `rose-suite.conf` &rarr; main suite configuration file.
- `rose-suite.info` &rarr; suite information file.

> - `suite.rc` &rarr; _Cylc_ control script file (Jinja2 language).

Reviewer 2: If this information is going to be included on this page, it should be included in the higher level `Get the model configuration` section, as they are common to the _GitHub_ and _MOSRS_ configurations.

To run the configuration, execute the following commands:

```
rose suite-run -C ~/roses/<suite-id>
```

This launches the _Rose/Cylc_ configuration and opens the _Cylc_ GUI (if you are running on the login node and the GUI doesn't appear, make sure you connected with [X11 forwarding](#x11-forwarding) enabled). The _Cylc_ GUI allows you to view and control the different tasks in the configuration as they run. The _Cylc_ GUI can be safely closed without impacting the model run. If you closed the GUI and want to re-open it, run:

```
rose suite-gcontrol --name=<suite-id> &
```

!!! tip
    The `&` is optional. It detaches the invoked process, allowing the terminal prompt to remain active while the GUI is open.

By default, the configuration, log files and outputs are copied to `/scratch/<project>/${USER}/cylc-run/<suite-id>`. A symbolic link to this directory is also created in your home directory under `~/cylc-run/<suite-ID>`. See the respective [Run a model](/models/run_a_model/) documentation for details on what outputs are generated and where to find them.

## Edit the model configuration

> In general, ACCESS modelling suites can be edited either by directly modifying the configuration files within the configuration directory, or by using the [_Rose_ GUI](#rosegui).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, the configurations of ACCESS models can be edited either by directly modifying the configuration files within the configuration directory, or by using the [_Rose_ GUI](#rosegui).
```

fcm commit
```

For additional `rosie` options, run:
```
rosie help
```

## Run the model configuration
!!! warning
    Before running a configuration, make sure to follow the initial setup for it (e.g., setting the correct compute project and storage resources). For details, follow the instructions relative to your specific model in the [Run a model](/models/run_a_model) page.

> ACCESS model suites run on [_Gadi_](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/0.+Welcome+to+Gadi#id-0.WelcometoGadi-Overview) through a [PBS job] submission. The suites comprise several tasks, such as checking out code repositories, compiling and building the different model components, running the model, etc. The workflow of these tasks is controlled by [_Cylc_](#cylc).

Author: Out of curiosity, is there a strong reason to remove the example tasks? Only a minor preference, but I'd prefer to leave those in to help clarify what a "task" is.

To run the configuration, execute the following commands:

```
cd ~/roses/<suite-id>

> rose suite-run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rose suite-run -C ~/roses/<suite-id>
```

```

This moves you into the configuration directory, launches the _Rose/Cylc_ configuration and opens the _Cylc_ GUI (if you are running on the login node and the GUI doesn't appear, make sure you connected with [X11 forwarding](#x11-forwarding) enabled). The _Cylc_ GUI allow you to view and control the different tasks in the suite as they are run. The _Cylc_ GUI can be safely closed without impacting the experiment run. If you closed the GUI and want to re-open it, run:

```
cd ~/roses/<suite-id>
rose suite-gcontrol &
```

!!! tip
    The `&` is optional. It detaches the invoked process, allowing the terminal prompt to remain active while the GUI is open.

> By default, the configuration, log files and outputs are copied to `/scratch/<project>/${USER}/cylc-run/<suite-id>`. A symbolic link to this directory is also created in the `$USER`'s home directory under `~/cylc-run/<suite-ID>`. See the respective [Run a model](/models/run_a_model/) documentation for details on what outputs are generated and where to find them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, the configuration, log files and outputs are copied to `/scratch/<project>/${USER}/cylc-run/<suite-id>`. A symbolic link to this directory is also created in your home directory under `~/cylc-run/<suite-ID>`. See the respective [Run a model](/models/run_a_model/) documentation for details on what outputs are generated and where to find them.
```

## Edit the model configuration

> In general, ACCESS modelling suites can be edited either by directly modifying the configuration files within the suite directory, or by using the [_Rose_ GUI](#rosegui).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, ACCESS modelling suites can be edited either by directly modifying the configuration files within the configuration directory, or by using the [_Rose_ GUI](#rosegui).
```
